[Music]
he's bigger faster and stronger
too he's the first member
video games were a huge part of my life
past tense i'm now 42 years old
i'm not gonna tell you they're a huge
part of my life now or that they're
gonna be
in the future tense but the one aspect
of playing video games that still means
something to me that i can still
positively appreciate to this day is the
music
you know a couple months ago i had a
conversation with tommy talarico
we talked a lot about veganism we taught
a lot about politics we talked
about the history of video games but i
said to him look whenever i go back
to play video games from my childhood
whether that's out of curiosity or
nostalgia i find myself
sitting there thinking how can anyone
waste
five minutes of their time with this
tedious
pointless repetitive task like if you
were paying me
money to play zillion for the sega
master system you couldn't
compel me to do it today i'd rather work
at starbucks i'd rather work at
mcdonald's i'd rather
i'd rather work in the warehouse for
amazon.com then
sit here and play zillion for the sega
master system even if i were being paid
to do it it's
shockingly meaningless to go back and
play those video games today that you
remember
but but the aspect of video games that
for me
still really has it it's aged well it's
still really old today it's going back
and hearing that music again
and a lot of the time when i hear that
music i can hear the beginnings
of my own interest in hip-hop music and
funk music and soul even in jazz
for many of us the main way we learned
about
music was through video games and we
started playing video games
long before we began dancing or singing
or learning to play
musical instruments ourselves
and here's the thing when i look back
at the super nintendo let me tell you i
put it
right at the bottom of my tier list so
i'm letting you know here by putting
this first in the video
i have some very strongly held opinions
and coming back to tommy talarico
you can directly compare award-winning
soundtracks
he made that were ported to both the
genesis
and the super nintendo and i would say
that in every single case it's the
genesis soundtrack that's better
[Music]
you know what this isn't comparative the
music
on the super nintendo is trash
period you don't have to compare it to
the genesis
you don't have to compare it to anything
else i would even say
that the original 8-bit nintendo
entertainment system or
if you really want to say the original
original famicom
in japan that had better music than the
super nintendo
[Music]
and i've got to tell you today if you're
going through the library
of greatest hits of the most outstanding
soundtracks the most outstanding music
for the nes it is so much deeper it is
so much more impressive than music on
the super nintendo now
with that having been said the library
of games
for the nintendo and famicom for the
8-bit systems
it's such a huge library of game that i
have to admit the percentage of those
games that have an
outstanding or great soundtrack it's
very small
do
[Music]
at this point already i think you have a
sense of what a strongly opinionated
tier list
this is gonna be you won't be surprised
to hear that for me the genesis
is very close to the top rank a on the
tier list
you tell me if you can name a single
other video game
that has stood the test of time the way
toe jam in earl hats
where that soundtrack today you could
play it on the radio
and it wasn't just influenced by funk
music it wasn't just influenced by
what was going on in hip-hop and rap
music it was influential
it was influential for a whole
generation of hip-hop artists who grew
up
playing toe jam and roll long before
they learned to dance or
long before they learned to scratch
records on a turntable or uh
went on to make music themselves so yeah
the genesis from my perspective has an
outstanding library of music
and that has a lot to do with the fact
that people like tommy talarico were
working with
gems software the actual specific editor
and yeah if you dig around you're going
to find that before that software came
out
even though the microchips were exactly
the same the music you had coming off
the genesis
was remarkably awful
it's a myth the tempo was shot
it's just a mess some of you
who are long-term viewers of the channel
might expect me to put the neo geo
really high on this tier list something
you may not know
the home console the neo go aes
had only mono sound
not stereo and it takes a hit for that
further if you were going to judge this
by the arcade version which
isn't really a fair comparison the
arcade machine
you could pretty much never hear the
music
so music was not really snk
corporation's
focus or emphasis so then they end up
quite a bit lower on the list
than you might reasonably expect and
i've put there the
new neo geo system which lets you play
the old games with hdmi and better sound
output
one level higher because the actual
sound quality you're going to get out of
an original
neo geo aes console is actually really
bad and not even in stereo as mentioned
nevertheless when playing old games
using the new hardware or using an
emulator for neo geo
often enough you're going to say wow i
can't believe
how amazing the music is
[Music]
bye
people really did not appreciate what a
great system neo geo was for music
and again that's partly because you
probably played these games
standing upright in a pizzeria you know
or in a barber shop and there was no way
you could actually even
hear the music you just hear characters
shouting at each other in japanese and
things exploding
but the total number of games in the neo
geo library is small
and the total number of games with
extraordinary or wonderful soundtracks
is few oh and here's the next generation
sega saturn and nintendo 64. and guess
where they
end up yes the music
on saturn and n64 is
really that bad
[Music]
yes i know you may have nostalgia you
may have rose-colored glasses maybe
specifically for the dulcet tones of
mario 64.
let me tell you this was the period of
time when computer programmers
suddenly had new options new
possibilities
there were new things they could do like
having continuous vocals and realistic
instrumentation cd quality sound
and the fact that they could do those
things tended to overshadow the question
of whether or not they
should do those things that was a whole
generation of
better hardware but much worse
dramatically worse soundtracks terrible
music in video games and it's the
generation with which i
lost all interest in video games myself
[Music]
in the year 2020 and still in 2021
there has been a huge revival of
interest in the formerly obscure
pc engine exported to the united states
as the turbo graphics 16
available in many different iterations
the core graphics 2 the turbo duo etc
etc
with or without cd sound most of you
never encountered this system when you
were children so there is no
nostalgia for it you're encountering it
for the first time now now there's a
retro mini console out there there are
different ways to play the games through
emulation and so on
is the music that bad yes on the
original 16-bit console
the music really is that bad and
the cd enhanced version of the console
it basically encounters the same problem
as the sega saturn and the n64
but the surprise entry in this
competition is the
lowly black and white nintendo game boy
for me game boy stands out at the
absolute
top of this list some of you may have
distant childhood memories
of putting in the headphones to your
game boy and now when you reflect on it
you think
the music couldn't have really been that
good it couldn't have been i must have
just been young i must have been naive i
didn't have a sophisticated taste then
go back and listen you will be astounded
now this video
has not been too burdened with lengthy
excerpts from the soundtracks being
contrasted here
but i'm going to play for you now a
significant portion of puyo puyo 2's
main theme song
and we're going to directly contrast the
super nintendo
version the sega genesis version and the
game boy version
and guess which one wins guess which one
stands out as
by far the best version of the
soundtrack
[Music]
[Applause]
so
[Music]
done
do
[Music]
bye
the portable game boy system had a
terrible screen terrible
controls it had a very simple version of
z80 architecture and there were a lot of
programmers around who knew how to get
the most
out of it and you knew how to make the
best possible music
on that very limited system but if there
is one console
that never ceases to amaze and astonish
me where if you put on just
any youtube video discussing this
console with
any set of random games from its past
you will be astounded again and again
at how much great music was gotten out
of a limited chipset
it is the commodore 64. commodore 64
stands at the absolute top of this list
despite the fact that the games
are absolutely incredibly awful
the vast majority of games that come to
64 today are unplayable
or they are only playable as kind of
historical curiosities like oh
isn't it amazing that they managed to
make a version of the simpsons arcade
game
that works on commodore 64. and i am
amazed
it is amazing i think with such limited
hardware that they did isn't it
interesting that they managed to make a
version of
arkanoid for commodore 64 that managed
to make a version of double dragon
that all of these games had a highly
inventive
commodore 64 version struggling against
the limits of that hardware
but the one aspect the experience that
lasts that still
entertaining or even inspiring today is
the music the music has aged
unbelievably well
so
[Music]
[Applause]
so
[Music]
and yeah there is a hole in the middle
of this list so i might as well poke in
the system that i knew best from my own
childhood
here i would put the 8-bit sega master
system
there at rank d to be fair to the sega
master system it is home to some of the
greatest 8-bit games ever made
and frankly some of the greatest video
games of all time
things like wonder boy 3 the dragon's
trap however
the number of those games is incredibly
few the total number of games on the
system is few
and the number of games with excellent
or outstanding soundtracks
is very few also talk boss featuring
words that kill
my slang is editorial explicit material
briefcase show lava stereo flow filming
donna realty set the black people free
[Music]
in ending this video i just want to say
that a friend of mine
someone who's known me for many years
and someone who knows that i feel that
adults should not play video games not
unless you're sitting down to play with
your children
or at any rate you should try to limit
the number of hours you're spending on
video games to being as close to zero as
possible
a friend of mine for many years admitted
to me that he does in fact
own a nintendo switch and he has in fact
been playing each and every pokemon game
that came out for the switch
adding up to many dozens or many
hundreds of hours i imagine and
this has been a lifelong habit for him
system to system
throughout his adult years he's kept up
with the pokemon series
i'd say that if you're not willing to
make the decision to quit video games
outright
i think you should reflect on how much
your own life would improve
if you picked a date on the calendar and
said
i am not going to play any video games
made more recently
than 1995. 1995 is in some ways an
arbitrary year if you start looking at
the history of video games
you might uh feel that you need to nudge
it ahead to 1997 or nudge it back to
but as you reflect on this possibility
how your own life would change
how what you do with all the hours in
the day you'd reclaimed by
eliminating video games in your life
think about how much better your life
would be
if instead of 1995 it were 1985.
the truth is that the more you can limit
yourself to playing
graphically simple games games that were
designed to be played in arcade for just
5 or 10 minutes
rather than games that are designed to
be played on a home console for 5 or 10
hours at a stretch the better your life
will be
if you can't achieve absolute zero
gaming in your life
i think you have to look at meaningful
ways to limit video gaming
both qualitatively and quantitatively